en/news/blog/2022/improving-dashboard-accessibility-for-blind-and-visually-impaired-ceph-users (#438)
ceph/ceph.io: src/en/news/blog/2022/improving-dashboard-accessibility-for-blind-and-visually-impaired-ceph-users/index.md

---
title: "Improving dashboard accessibility for blind and visually impaired ceph users"
date: "2022-09-07"
author: "Ngwa Sedrick Meh"
image: "./images/banner.png"
tags:
  - "ceph"
  - "dashboard"
  - "accessibility"
  - "a11y"

>   - "WCAG 2.1"

Reviewer: The site requires all tags to be lowercase, like you've done with `accessibility`. I'd try `wcag2.1`, and if it still has issues, remove the tag altogether.

  - "testing"
  - "internship"
  - "gsoc"
---

## Introduction

Web accessibility, or e-accessibility, is the inclusive practice of ensuring there are no barriers
that prevent interaction with, or access to, websites on the World Wide Web by people with
physical disabilities, situational disabilities, and socio-economic restrictions on bandwidth and
speed. When sites are correctly designed, developed and edited, more users have equal access
to information and functionality.([Wikipedia](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Web_accessibility))

The Ceph Dashboard is a built-in web-based Ceph management and monitoring application through which you can inspect and administer various aspects and resources within the cluster.

## Problem description

While it's very likely that the Ceph dashboard meets some accessibility guidelines (ARIA attributes, alt text, etc), we currently ignore its level of conformance to WCAG 2.1 standard (levels A, AA and AAA).

In a recent article published by the world bank on [disability inclusion](https://www.worldbank.org/en/topic/disability#1), disabilities affect about 1
billion people world wide. These people use web technologies in a variety of ways. Some

> primarily navigate sites by means of a keyboard alone while others with vision disabilities rely

Reviewer: ```suggestion
primarily navigate sites by means of a keyboard alone, while others with vision disabilities rely
```

on assistive technologies like screen readers.

> By ensuring the dashboard meets WCAG 2.1 level A compliance, blind and visually impaired ceph users will not be left out and will be able to manage their ceph clusters comfortably.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
By ensuring the Dashboard meets WCAG 2.1 level A compliance, blind and visually impaired Ceph users will not be left out and will be able to manage their Ceph clusters comfortably.
```

## Project

> For the past few months we have been working on updating the dashboard to meet WCAG 2.1 level A conformance so that blind and visually impaired ceph users can also use it comfortably to manage and monitor their ceph clusters.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
For the past few months we have been working on updating the dashboard to meet WCAG 2.1 level A conformance so that blind and visually impaired Ceph users can also use it comfortably to manage and monitor their Ceph clusters.
```

To achieve this goal, we had to:

- Test and identify areas of the dashboard in need of an accessibility update
- Apply fixes based on WCAG 2.1 guidelines

> - Add automated testing to prevent regressions

Reviewer: Hard to tell when this isn't rendered, but is this list numbered? If not, let's have it numbered.

### Identifying accessibility issues

After testing several recommended [accessibilty checkers](https://www.w3.org/WAI/ER/tools/?q=wcag-21-w3c-web-content-accessibility-guidelines-21) by the W3C, we chose the [accessibility insights plugin](https://accessibilityinsights.io/docs/en/web/overview/) to help quickly identify the most common accessibility issues for each page of the the dashboard.

### Accessibility improvements

> Based on the identified issues we we improved the accessibility of several key components including:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Based on the identified issues, we improved the accessibility of several key components including:
```

#### Login page

> By improving the color contrast of the login form input fields users can now clearly read the labels and use the keyboard to navigate the inputs

Reviewer: ```suggestion
By improving the color contrast of the login form, input fields users can now clearly read the labels and use the keyboard to navigate the inputs.
```

![login page](./images/login.png)

> #### landing page

Reviewer: ```suggestion
#### Landing Page
```

The dashboard page displays key monitoring information about cluster status, capacity and performance. We improved on the following aspects:

- updated the cluster labels (HEALTH_WARN, HEALTH_OK, HEALTH_ERROR) to be more descriptive (Warning, Ok, Error)

- Used darker colors for labels to make them more legible
- Added accessible names to informative icons for screen readers

![Dashboard page](./images/dashboard.png)

#### Navigation

> The navigation component enables quick access to all the dashboard's sections. We were able to make the following accessibility updates.

Reviewer: I'd use first-person language throughout your blog post (*I* did X instead of *we* did X). This was your project-- don't minimize your hand in everything!

```suggestion
The navigation component enables quick access to all the Dashboard's sections. I was able to make the following accessibility updates:
```

> - Add accessible roles for all dropdown menu's for easier detection by screen readers

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- Add accessible roles for all dropdown menus for easier detection by screen readers
```

- Used darker background colors and increased label font size for better legibility

![Navigation](./images/navigation.png)

#### Datatables

> The datatable component is widely used in the dashboard to display more detailed information. The improvements made here include:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The datatable component is widely used in the Dashboard to display more detailed information. The improvements made here include:
```

- Added accessible labels for row selection checkboxes for better identification by screen readers

> - Added a custom pagination component with better uX and accessibility

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- Added a custom pagination component with better UX and accessibility
```

- Changed table action button label colors from red to cyan for better legibility and focus

![Datatable](./images/datatable.png)

Many more sub-components were also updated and can be found on [GitHub](https://github.com/ceph/ceph/pulls/nsedrickm)

### Accessibility testing

> To prevent future regressions, we added end to end accessibility tests for high impact components like the dashboard and navigation. If any future regressions on these components occurs, a tabulated error description is generated and added to the cypress log for debugging.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
To prevent future regressions, we added end to end accessibility tests for high impact components like the dashboard and navigation. If any future regressions on these components occurs, a tabulated error description is generated and added to the Cypress log for debugging.
```

![Error message](./images/error.png)

More information on accessibility e2e testing can be found in the dashboard developer [documentation](https://docs.ceph.com/en/latest/dev/developer_guide/dash-devel/#accessibility).

## Challenges faced

> While working on this project, I ran into several challenges. Actually tracking down the code where fixes needed to be made was quite a task most times given how large the ceph codebase is. Using grep helped me find code sections a lot faster

Reviewer: ```suggestion
While working on this project, I ran into several challenges. Actually tracking down the code where fixes needed to be made was quite a task most times, given how large the Ceph codebase is. Using `grep` helped me find code sections a lot faster.
```

> Also, some components like the datatable are actually provided by a third party library, These made it a bit challenging to improve on the accessibility of certain parts. Fortunately we could develop and use custom templates instead with better accessibility. In some extreme cases whole components had to be replaced like the table pagination component.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Also, some components like the datatable are actually provided by a third party library. This made it a bit challenging to improve on the accessibility of certain parts. Fortunately, we could develop and use custom templates instead with better accessibility. In some extreme cases, whole components had to be replaced like the table pagination component.
```

> In addition some updates I made altered the QA tests currently in place for the dashboard. This earned me several days of debugging to figure out what I was doing wrong and how to seek help when stuck.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
In addition, some updates I made altered the QA tests currently in place for the Dashboard. This earned me several days of debugging to figure out what I was doing wrong and how to seek help when stuck.
```

## Conclusion

> Accessibility is quite important and should be considered for every application used by a wide audience. Though at the time of this writing all the Pull requests have not been merged. We can be certain the next official release of Ceph dashboard will be WCAG 2.1 level A compliant and therefore usable by blind and visually impaired Ceph users.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Accessibility is quite important and should be considered for every application used by a wide audience. Though at the time of this writing all the Pull requests have not been merged, we can be certain the next official release of Ceph dashboard will be more WCAG 2.1 level A compliant and therefore improved for blind and visually impaired Ceph users.
```

> This was truly an engaging experience for me, I learned a lot while also contributing substantially to Ceph. I would like to thank my mentors Laura Flores and Ernesto Puerta and the entire dashboard team for all their relentless support and guidance.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
This was truly an engaging experience for me, I learned a lot while also contributing substantially to Ceph. I would like to thank my mentors Laura Flores and Ernesto Puerta and the entire Dashboard team for all their relentless support and guidance.
```

> Not only have I picked up new technical skills like Cypress and e2e testing but also learned how to communicate, contribute to discussions and also seek help when stuck on challenges.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Not only have I picked up new technical skills like Cypress and e2e testing, but I have also learned how to communicate, contribute to discussions, and seek help when stuck on challenges.
```

You can always reach out to me on my email me at: [nsedrick101@gmail.com](mailto:nsedrick101@gmail.com).

## Useful Links

- [Documentation](https://docs.ceph.com/en/latest/dev/developer_guide/dash-devel/#accessibility)

> - [Issue trackers](https://tracker.ceph.com/projects/dashboard/agile/board?utf8=%E2%9C%93&set_filter=1&f%5B%5D=status_id&op%5Bstatus_id%5D=o&f%5B%5D=category_id&op%5Bcategory_id%5D=%3D&v%5Bcategory_id%5D%5B%5D=219&f%5B%5D=&c%5B%5D=tracker&c%5B%5D=assigned_to)

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- [Accessibility Issue trackers](https://tracker.ceph.com/projects/dashboard/agile/board?utf8=%E2%9C%93&set_filter=1&f%5B%5D=status_id&op%5Bstatus_id%5D=o&f%5B%5D=category_id&op%5Bcategory_id%5D=%3D&v%5Bcategory_id%5D%5B%5D=219&f%5B%5D=&c%5B%5D=tracker&c%5B%5D=assigned_to)
```

---
title: "Improving dashboard accessibility for blind and visually impaired ceph users"
date: "2022-09-07"
author: "Ngwa Sedrick Meh"
image: "images/banner.png"
tags:
  - "ceph"
  - "dashboard"
  - "accessibility"
  - "a11y"
  - "wcag2.1"
  - "testing"
  - "internship"
  - "gsoc"
---

## Introduction

Web accessibility, or e-accessibility, is the inclusive practice of ensuring there are no barriers
that prevent interaction with, or access to, websites on the World Wide Web by people with
physical disabilities, situational disabilities, and socio-economic restrictions on bandwidth and
speed. When sites are correctly designed, developed and edited, more users have equal access

> to information and functionality.([Wikipedia](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Web_accessibility))

Reviewer: ```suggestion
to information and functionality. ([Wikipedia](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Web_accessibility))
```

By ensuring the Dashboard meets WCAG 2.1 level A compliance, blind and visually impaired Ceph users will not be left out and will be able to manage their Ceph clusters comfortably.

## Project

For the past few months we have been working on updating the dashboard to meet WCAG 2.1 level A conformance so that blind and visually impaired Ceph users can also use it comfortably to manage and monitor their Ceph clusters.

To achieve this goal, we had to:

1. Test and identify areas of the dashboard in need of an accessibility update
2. Apply fixes based on WCAG 2.1 guidelines
3. Add automated testing to prevent regressions

### Identifying accessibility issues

After testing several recommended [accessibilty checkers](https://www.w3.org/WAI/ER/tools/?q=wcag-21-w3c-web-content-accessibility-guidelines-21) by the W3C, we chose the [accessibility insights plugin](https://accessibilityinsights.io/docs/en/web/overview/) to help quickly identify the most common accessibility issues for each page of the the dashboard.

### Accessibility improvements

Based on the identified issues, we improved the accessibility of several key components including:

#### Login Page

> By improving the color contrast of the login form, input fields users can now clearly read the labels and use the keyboard to navigate the inputs.

Reviewer 2: Paradoxically, from the screenshot itself, it now looks with less contrast (the original button was reddish, so more eye catching). Perhaps it'd be better to display these screenshots with the plugin that outlines the problematic elements, and compare the before and after situation?

![image](https://user-images.githubusercontent.com/37327689/189380139-1b2b4878-6322-4161-8791-8d7107788546.png)

![login page](images/login.png)

#### Landing Page

The Dashboard page displays key monitoring information about cluster status, capacity and performance. We improved on the following aspects:

> - updated the cluster labels (HEALTH_WARN, HEALTH_OK, HEALTH_ERROR) to be more descriptive (Warning, Ok, Error)

Reviewer 2: Capitalization and use of formattin to indicate labels/literal values:
```suggestion
- Updated the cluster labels (`HEALTH_WARN`, `HEALTH_OK`, `HEALTH_ERROR`) to be more descriptive (`Warning`, `Ok`, `Error`)
```

> - Used darker colors for labels to make them more legible

Reviewer 2: What about displaying the actual colors (like `#ff0000` to `#00ff00`)? You can use HTML together with Markdown if you need it.

> - Added accessible names to informative icons for screen readers

Reviewer 2: Same here, it'd be great to read an example of an accesible name.

![Dashboard page](images/dashboard.png)

#### Navigation

> The navigation component enables quick access to all the Dashboard's sections. I was able to make the following accessibility updates:

Reviewer 2: Keep a consistent tone of voice. Previously you used "we" and here you changed to "I". Both are valid, but please pick one and stick to it.
```suggestion
The navigation component enables quick access to all the Dashboard's sections. We were able to make the following accessibility updates:
```

Reviewer: @nSedrickm as per my previous suggestion, I'd go with "I" to put the emphasis on you leading the project! But it's up to you.

- Add accessible roles for all dropdown menus for easier detection by screen readers

> - Used darker background colors and increased label font size for better legibility

Reviewer 2: Same suggestions as before: examples of each?

> ![Navigation](images/navigation.png)

Reviewer 2: I'd the same: before and after of the plugin output.

#### Datatables

The datatable component is widely used in the Dashboard to display more detailed information. The improvements made here include:

- Added accessible labels for row selection checkboxes for better identification by screen readers
- Added a custom pagination component with better UX and accessibility

> - Changed table action button label colors from red to cyan for better legibility and focus

Reviewer 2: What about specific/cropped/zoomed screenshots of the changes you made? From the overall table screenshot is hard to notice your changes (no before-after comparison). What about a cropped and zoomed screenshot of the new pagination, before and after?

Don't waste the magnificent chance that UI programming gives you to highlight your contributors. Back-end developers don't get the same impact if they just post an before-after picture of their new search algorithm, or the improved SQL schema. The ouctomes of your work here are purely visual, so please leverage that.

Author: Thanks @epuertat  Working on adding more images

![Datatable](images/datatable.png)

> Many more sub-components were also updated and can be found on [GitHub](https://github.com/ceph/ceph/pulls/nsedrickm)

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Many more sub-components were also updated and can be found on [GitHub](https://github.com/ceph/ceph/pulls/nsedrickm).
```

> Many more sub-components were also updated and can be found on [GitHub](https://github.com/ceph/ceph/pulls/nsedrickm).

Reviewer 2: Keep in mind that that URL, over time, will return 0 pull requests (as soon as they become merged). What about this one: https://github.com/ceph/ceph/pulls?q=is%3Apr+author%3Ansedrickm+label%3A%22GSoC+%2F+Outreachy%22+no%3Aclosed

### Accessibility testing

> To prevent future regressions, we added end to end accessibility tests for high impact components like the dashboard and navigation. If any future regressions on these components occurs, a tabulated error description is generated and added to the Cypress log for debugging.

Reviewer: I assume you mean the "health page" here?
```suggestion
To prevent future regressions, we added end to end accessibility tests for high impact components like the health page and navigation. If any future regressions on these components occurs, a tabulated error description is generated and added to the Cypress log for debugging.
```

> ![Error message](images/error.png)

Reviewer 2: Really nice! That's what I mean: clear, concise.

More information on accessibility e2e testing can be found in the dashboard developer [documentation](https://docs.ceph.com/en/latest/dev/developer_guide/dash-devel/#accessibility).

## Challenges faced

While working on this project, I ran into several challenges. Actually tracking down the code where fixes needed to be made was quite a task most times, given how large the Ceph codebase is. Using `grep` helped me find code sections a lot faster.

> Also, some components like the datatable are actually provided by a third party library. This made it a bit challenging to improve on the accessibility of certain parts. Fortunately, we could develop and use custom templates instead with better accessibility. In some extreme cases whole components had to be replaced like the table pagination component.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Also, some components like the datatable are actually provided by a third party library. This made it a bit challenging to improve on the accessibility of certain parts. Fortunately, we could develop and use custom templates instead with better accessibility. In some extreme cases, whole components had to be replaced like the table pagination component.
```

> In addition some updates I made altered the QA tests currently in place for the Dashboard. This earned me several days of debugging to figure out what I was doing wrong and how to seek help when stuck.

Reviewer: Helps improve the clarity of the sentence.
```suggestion
In addition, some of the updates I made altered the QA tests currently in place for the Dashboard. This earned me several days of debugging to figure out what I was doing wrong and how to seek help when stuck.
```

> In addition, some of the updates I made altered the QA tests currently in place for the Dashboard. This earned me several days of debugging to figure out what I was doing wrong and how to seek help when stuck.

Reviewer 2: This is really interesting! We should probably have a retrospective with all GSoC @ceph/2022-interns, to learn more about their issues getting used to Ceph. What do you think: @ljflores @alimaredia ?

Reviewer: +1 @epuertat!

## Conclusion

> Accessibility is quite important and should be considered for every application used by a wide audience. Though at the time of this writing all the Pull requests have not been merged, we can be certain the next official release of Ceph dashboard will be more WCAG 2.1 level A compliant and therefore improved for blind and visually impaired Ceph users.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Accessibility is quite important and should be considered for every application used by a wide audience. Even though not all the pull requests have been merged at the time of writing this blog post, we can be certain that in next Ceph release, the dashboard will be more WCAG 2.1 level A compliant and therefore improved for blind and visually impaired Ceph users.
```

This was truly an engaging experience for me, I learned a lot while also contributing substantially to Ceph. I would like to thank my mentors Laura Flores and Ernesto Puerta and the entire Dashboard team for all their relentless support and guidance.

> Not only have I picked up new technical skills like Cypress and e2e testing but I have also learned how to communicate, contribute to discussions and also seek help when stuck on challenges.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Not only have I picked up new technical skills like Cypress and e2e testing, but I have also learned how to communicate, contribute to discussions, and also seek help when stuck on challenges.
```

## Pending updates

> While we aimed to also add a dark mode feature to the dashboard during this period we unfortunately could not due to time constraints. Not to worry, it sure is planned and will be added soon. I remain a ceph contributor and will continue to make improvements wherever I can

Reviewer: No need to write this section. Whenever the dark mode feature is introduced, we can write another blog post about it!

Author: I felt the need to add it here because it was one of the deliverables promised and the gsoc f[inal submission requirements](https://developers.google.com/open-source/gsoc/help/work-product)  says to mention any work left

Reviewer: @nSedrickm sure, makes sense. In that case, I have one final edit for you. Otherwise, everything looks good:

Grammar and "in the future", so you're not boxing yourself into more time constraints.
```suggestion
## Pending updates

While we aimed to also add a dark mode feature to the dashboard during this period, we unfortunately could not due to time constraints. Not to worry, it sure is planned and will be added in the future. I remain a Ceph contributor and will continue to make improvements wherever I can.
```

### Accessibility improvements

Based on the identified issues, we improved the accessibility of several key components including:

#### Login Page

By improving the color contrast of the login form, input fields users can now clearly read the labels and use the keyboard to navigate the inputs.

Login Page before:

![login page before](images/login-before.png)

Login Page after:

![login page](images/login.png)

#### Health Page

The Dashboard health page displays key monitoring information about cluster status, capacity and performance. We improved on the following aspects:

- Updated the cluster labels (`HEALTH_OK`,`HEALTH_WARN`, `HEALTH_ERROR`) to be more descriptive (`OK`,`WARNING`, `ERROR`)

- Updated label colors to make them more legible

  | Old                                            |                     New                     |
  | ---------------------------------------------- | :-----------------------------------------: |

>   | <span style="color:#0b0">HEALTH_OK</span>      |     <span style="color:#0b0">Ok</span>      |

Reviewer: Minor nit:
```suggestion
  | <span style="color:#0b0">HEALTH_OK</span>      |     <span style="color:#0b0">OK</span>      |
```

Reviewer: OK should be capitalized.

Author: Eagle eye :)

Author: Updated
